---
layout: post
title: Mechanical Keyboards
categories:
  - hardware
  - gadgets
---

```
 ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____
||m |||e |||c |||h |||a |||n |||i |||c |||a |||l ||
||__|||__|||__|||__|||__|||__|||__|||__|||__|||__||
|/__\|/__\|/__\|/__\|/__\|/__\|/__\|/__\|/__\|/__\|
 ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____
||k |||e |||y |||b |||o |||a |||r |||d |||s ||
||__|||__|||__|||__|||__|||__|||__|||__|||__||
|/__\|/__\|/__\|/__\|/__\|/__\|/__\|/__\|/__\|
```

After a few months of searching and tinkering, and generally getting the feel
for mechanical keyboards, I think I have finally decided on a configuration that
I am happy with, and I can now carry on with my life and start doing useful
things again, like writing software.

My requirements were pretty simple - All I really knew at the time that I began
was that I wanted something that felt more solid and brought me more joy than
typing on my old Microsoft Elite Keyboard, which brings up an interesting data
point: In order to successfully switch to a mechanical keyboard, at the time of
this writing, the options for something in an ergonomic shape that doesn't look
like it came out of the 80's is practically non-existent, so you will need to
leave your curved, ergonomic keyboard preferences at the door unless you are
ready to throw down some serious cash for something custom made.

Tactile Keyboards
-----------------

I owned a keyboard that felt similar to a linear cherry MX switch keyboard some
time ago. It came along with a Compaq computer from many years ago. It was an
NMB, but I forget the model number. Anyways, the point is that the thing
provided no feedback. There was no distinguished point at which the key would
register with a small amount of feedback to tell me "Hey, I just registered the
key you just pressed, so you can back off now.". I won't pretend to be a real
touch typist - I slam the keys on my keyboard all day long with my fat, ugly man
fingers and bottom them out all the way, but I really do prefer that the keys
give some kind of feedback, which rubber domes simply cannot provide. So I
figured I had 2 realistic choices: Cherry MX Blue, or Cherry MX Brown. I really
wanted Cherry MX Clear for their more prominent tactile feedback, but since they
are so damn hard to find I decided that it was more important to get a keyboard
that I like rather than just keys I like, so I started out with Cherry MX
Browns.

Filco Majestouch 2 (104-key, Cherry MX Brown)
---------------------------------------------

This is the first mechanical keyboard I chose. I wanted the tactile feedback
without the noise because my girlfriend and I were on very different sleep
schedules and I work from home 30% of the time.

![""](/assets/attachments/2013-05-14-filco_1.jpg)

I chose a white model because at the time I was running a Mac Mini with an LED
Cinema Display, and I thought it would look more consistent. It's not the same
white that Apple typically uses but it works fine. The cherry switches suited my
needs well. The tactile feel of Cherry MX Brown's was sufficient at the time,
felt good, and I felt cool for having a mechanical keyboard. There was a very
large difference not just in how typing felt, but also my typing speed, as well
as my enjoyment of it. I felt myself wanting to code more, even when I had
nothing going on I was thinking of project ideas so that I could type out some
prototypes in VI. 

I really enjoyed the Filco Majestouch 2, in fact I liked it so much that I
bought another one of the exact same model and took it to the office, but my
coworkers disliked the noticeably louder audible click (mostly from bottoming
out) and complained frequently, so I ended up getting rid of one of them.

Another note on click volume - Although the Cherry MX Brown's are not known for
their click noise, they are MUCH louder than your typical keyboard, and VERY
much louder than your typical laptop chiclet keys, mostly on bottoming out and
also on key release (if you don't release them softly), so if you are a
noise-constrained, heavy-handed typist then be warned.

Filco Majestouch 2 (87-key tenkeyless, Cherry MX Blue)
------------------------------------------------------

After some time, I decided that I would try Cherry MX Blue key switches, mostly
because I regretted not being adventurous enough to try a tenkeyless board
before and wanted something new. Since Filco is now my golden standard in
keyboards, I picked up a Majestouch 2 tenkeyless in black with Cherry MX Blue
switches. I also ordered some dampners to try mitigating the bottom-out slam
sound that I constantly make on my keyboard, and a set of completely blank key
black key caps from [WASD Keyboards](http://www.wasdkeyboards.com). I'll try to
talk a little about the keyboard first and then go into the actual accessories.

![""](/assets/attachments/2013-05-14-filco_2.jpg)

I really like the Cherry MX Blues, no matter how noisy they are. Everyone can
deal with it, I love them. Although the actuation force is only slightly higher
than that of Cherry MX Brown key switches, I notice a very large difference in
how the keys feel and how hard I press down on them. Maybe it has something to
do with the extra tactile click, I am not sure. By the way, you can actually
feel the click - it is not just the sound that draws people to the Cherry MX
Blue switches - it is also the extra click feeling.

The tenkeyless model is awesome. Having the mouse closer to the keyboard might
be something that gaming enthusiasts rave about, but as a non-gamer,
programmer-type, I can tell you that it is nicer to have the mouse a bit closer
to the center of the desk. I really do not miss the numpad at all - only the
vertical Enter key a little bit.

Modifications
-------------

While I did not do any heavy modding to my keyboard, I did make a few little
adjustments and tried a few little things here and there that are worth
mentioning.

### Dampeners

I tried using some 40A-L 0.2mm O-ring dampeners from WASD Keyboards to mitigate
the bottoming-out thud from my keyboard. After installing them, I thought I
liked them for about a week. I then noticed that with heavy use, I can feel a
very big difference in the key presses, both in travel distance and in feedback
sharpness. After thinking about it for a while, I decided that there was not a
significant difference between the old rubber dome key switch feeling, and
Cherry switches with dampeners installed. Since this really was not what I was
going for, I ended up removing all of them, and I do not see myself ever going
back to using them.

![""](/assets/attachments/2013-05-14-keycap_dampeners1.jpg)
![""](/assets/attachments/2013-05-14-keycap_dampeners2.jpg)

### Blank Key Caps

I bought an 87-key set of blank key caps from WASD Keyboards, not really knowing
what I was buying.

![""](/assets/attachments/2013-05-14-blue_keycap_spacebar.jpg)

The first thing I noticed about the blank key caps was that in direct sun light,
the black space bar had a blue-ish tint to it, but none of the other keys did.
You can see this clearly in the pictures above. In the picture to the right, the
space bar resting on top of the keyboard is the stock Filco key, which matches
the rest of the blank caps much more nicely than the cap that came with them.
Weird. Anyways, I just left the stock Filco on and used the rest of the blank
caps from WASD. Problem solved.

Lastly, and most importantly, I noticed that the key caps were lighter than the
stock Filco's. Maybe this is just a perception thing, but there is a very
noticeable difference in the feel of key presses using the WASD 87-key set. The
plastic does not feel as rigid and unforgiving as the stock Filco's. For this
reason, I ended up taking all of the character key caps off and using the stock
ones instead for those. It might be worth it to look into some high quality PBT
key caps in the future.

All of this keycap changing turned out to be a huge pain, especially the keys
that require a stabilizing bar. Some keyboards use alternate ways of stabilizing
the keys, but Filco uses the traditional stabilizing bar as pictured below (be
gentle when removing the caps from these keys):

![""](/assets/attachments/2013-05-14-stabalizer_bar.jpg)

### Unbalanced feet

My Filco keyboard had **very** noticeable wobble to it, due to the feet being
uneven. My first 104-key did not have this problem, but the tenkeyless model
did. You can see the uneven feet in the below picture:

![""](/assets/attachments/2013-05-14-filco_unbalanced.jpg)

All I had to do to fix this was to cut a couple of small pieces of electrical
tape and adhere them to the gimp foot. Pretty easy, but annoying for a brand new
keyboard I just spent good money on.

Final Outcome
-------------

When I finally settled on my configuration, it was a mix of 3 different key cap
types with no dampeners and no blank keys. I like my keyboard to give me
feedback when I press keys. **Lots** of feedback, which is why I am interested
in trying Cherry MX clears or greens when they become more accessible.

![""](/assets/attachments/2013-05-14-filco_final.jpg)

The Verdict
-----------

* All in all, mechanical keyboards are very much worth it. Now that I have been
  using them for a little over a year, I can't see myself going back to rubber
  domes.
* I love the tenkeyless layout and the extra desk space that gives me.
* Although I don't care for the audible click the Cherry MX Blue switches
  provide, I do like the extra feedback I get from them.
* If you can find a Cherry MX Clear switch board (WASD has a new one coming out
  soon), I would definitely check that out. It's probably awesome.
* I am definitely happy that my keyboard has **no media keys** and **no
  backlighting**
* N-Key Rollover is cool. But do you use it? Ever? If you aren't a gamer, then
  probably not. I just use the USB connection of my board and really don't notice
  the difference, since I rarely smash my face into the keyboard expecting all of
  the keys to register.

Suppliers I used
----------------

For all 3 Filco keyboards I have owned, I have purchased directly from [The
Keyboard Company](http://www.thekeyboardcompany.co.uk). They ship very quickly.

For key caps, key pullers, and dapeners, I bought from [WASD
Keyboards](http://www.wasdkeyboards.com) and used the local pick-up option,
since they are right off of Calaveras in Milpitas, CA.

I didn't actually purchase anything from them, but it looks like they
occasionally have PBT key caps and Cherry MX clear switch keyboards at
[mechanicalkeyboards.com](http://www.mechanicalkeyboards.com)
