---
layout: post
title: Yum repository snapshots made easy with pakrat
categories:
  - python
  - yum
  - rpm
  - redhat
  - packaging
  - open source
tags:
  - mirror
  - yum
  - version
  - asynchronous
  - multithreading
  - rpm
  - package manager
  - download
  - createrepo
  - repodata
  - repository
---

A while ago I wrote a hack bash script that would use `curl` to download RPM
artifacts from a remote source. I used it to create my own local YUM
repositories in an interesting way.

Normally a YUM repository is just two things: some place that contains a packages
repository, and some other place that contains the YUM metadata associated with
it. That's fine if the client pointing at the repository is a single, individual
unit. It gets a little wonky though, when you point say, 100 servers at the same
repo. You never know at what point in time the repo will be updated by its
upstream maintainer. You might also have some mission-critical systems that you'd
want to park on a known-good snapshot of a YUM repository until you've had time
to test changes coming in from upstream.

How do you take a snapshot of a YUM repository at any point in time? At first it
sounds easy. "I'll just use reposync and save the resulting dir.". However, the
data set will grow rapidly because you are storing all packages each time you
make a new snapshot. "Well then, I'll just use reposync in a common directory
and make symlinks back from some versioned directory to the common package
location." You're getting closer. However, the resulting YUM metadata will not
accurately represent what the repository looked like when the snapshot was
taken - it will instead represent one huge repository containing everything
since you started mirroring the YUM repository.

I spent a few weekends coming up with a generic solution to this problem.
[pakrat](https://github.com/ryanuber/pakrat) is a tool for mirroring and
optionally versioning YUM repositories. The trick to it is using the YUM
metadata as the versioning. It will store all downloaded packages for a
particular repository in its own common `packages` directory, and during each
run it will create a new set of YUM metadata for only the packages which were
present in the repository at the time the snapshot was taken.

I've recently released [pakrat](https://github.com/ryanuber/pakrat) under an MIT
license. Pakrat is available on PyPI, so you can check it out using
`easy_install pakrat`.

---
Pakrat
-------

A command-line tool to mirror YUM repositories with versioning

What does it do?
----------------

* You invoke pakrat and pass it some repository baseurl's or the path
  to some YUM configurations
* Pakrat mirrors the YUM repositories, and optionally arranges the
  data in a versioned manner.

Installation
------------

Pakrat is available in PyPI as `pakrat`. That means you can install it with
easy_install:

```
# easy_install pakrat
```

*NOTE*
Installation from PyPI should work on any Linux. However, since Pakrat depends
on YUM and Createrepo, which are not available in PyPI, these dependencies will
not be detected as missing. The easiest install path is to install on some kind
of RHEL like so:

```
# yum -y install createrepo
# easy_install pakrat
```

How to use it
-------------

Pakrat is mainly a command-line driven tool. The simplest possible example
would involve mirroring a YUM repository in a very basic way:

```
$ pakrat --name centos --url http://mirror.centos.org/centos/6/os/x86_64
$ tree -d centos
centos/
+-- Packages
+-- repodata
```

A slightly more complex example would be to version the same repository. To
do this, you must pass in a version number. An easy example is to mirror a
repository daily.

```
$ pakrat \
    --repoversion $(date +%Y-%m-%d) \
    --name centos \
    --url http://mirror.centos.org/centos/6/os/x86_64
$ tree -d centos
centos/
+-- 2013-07-29
|   +-- Packages -> ../Packages
|   +-- repodata
+-- latest -> 2013-07-29
+-- Packages
```

If you were to configure the above to command to run on a daily schedule,
eventually you would see something like:

```
$ tree -d centos
centos/
+-- 2013-07-29
|   +-- Packages -> ../Packages
|   +-- repodata
+-- 2013-07-30
|   +-- Packages -> ../Packages
|   +-- repodata
+-- 2013-07-31
|   +-- Packages -> ../Packages
|   +-- repodata
+-- latest -> 2013-07-31
+-- Packages
```

Pakrat is also capable of handling multiple YUM repositories in the same mirror
run. If multiple repositories are specified, each repository will get its own
download thread. This is handy if you are syncing from a mirror that is not
particularly quick. The other repositories do not need to wait on it to finish.

```
$ pakrat \
    --repoversion $(date +%Y-%m-%d) \
    --name centos \
    --url http://mirror.centos.org/centos/6/os/x86_64 \
    --name epel \
    --url http://dl.fedoraproject.org/pub/epel/6/x86_64
$ tree -d centos epel
centos/
+-- 2013-07-29
|   +-- Packages -> ../Packages
|   +-- repodata
+-- latest -> 2013-07-29
+-- Packages
epel/
+-- 2013-07-29
|   +-- Packages -> ../Packages
|   +-- repodata
+-- latest -> 2013-07-29
+-- Packages
```

Configuration can also be passed in from YUM configuration files. See the CLI
`--help` for details.

Building an RPM
---------------

Pakrat can be easily packaged into an RPM.

1. Download a release and name the tarball `pakrat.tar.gz`:

```
curl -o pakrat.tar.gz -L https://github.com/ryanuber/pakrat/archive/master.tar.gz
```

2. Build it into an RPM:

```
rpmbuild -tb pakrat.tar.gz
```

What's missing
--------------

* Better logging (currently console-only)

Thanks
------

Thanks to [Keith Chambers](https://github.com/keithchambers) for help with the ideas
and useful input on CLI design.
